README.md, before:

# PROJECT ARRAY TABLE EXTENSION

**ate** is an acronym for (Bash) Array Table Extension

## INTRODUCTION

**ate** is a loadable builtin command for Bash that enhances Bash
arrays with a table view, fast indexed access to virtual rows, and
some database features through a simple API.

Bash arrays are double-linked lists of string values with assigned
rather than positional index values.  They are optimized for efficient
appending and sequential reads (ie **for** loops), but are quite slow
for indexed access, especially for large arrays.

**ate** works with a custom Bash shell variable that catalogs the
first array element of each virtual row in a C-langauge array that
enables nearly instant indexed access to the virtual rows for
reading and writing.

## FEATURES

- **Much faster than stanard Bash array**  
  **ate** creates a C-language array index of pointers to the first
  array element of a virtual row.  The index enables direct access
  to a virtual row for both reading and writing.

- **The table state persists between calls to the `ate` command**  
  **ate** uses a custom Bash SHELL_VAR, accessed through the handle
  name, to keep track of the table dimensions and row indexes.  This
  permits Bash garbage collection to manage the memory while providing

- **Can create alternate views to a table**  
  Secondary handles can contain sorted or filtered views of a table

- **Binary search action `seek_key` for ISAM access**  
  Fast seek action enables efficient lookup tables for some
  data processing tasks

- **Can call Bash script functions to perform per-row actions**  
  The ability of **ate** to access script functions enables flexible
  programming techniques that are the reason one chooses a script
  solution.  For example, **ate** exposes C library function `qsort`
  to script-based comparison functions.

## USAGE

**ate** features are accessed through the **ate** command, followed
by an `action` string and parameters that control the operation of
the requested action.

### Basic Operation:

<pre>
# Making a 2-field table from an array with paired values:
declare -a pets=(
  dog     bark
  cat     meow
  chicken cluck
  fish    splash
)

# Initialize the table
ate <b>declare</b> pets_handle 2 pets

# Read row #1 (index 0):
ate <b>get_row</b> pets_handle 0
echo "index 0 contains ${ATE_ARRAY[*]}"

# Update pet row's sound
ATE_ARRAY[1]="woof"
ate <b>put_row</b> pets_handle 0 ATE_ARRAY
</pre>

### Getting help:

<pre>
# Bash builtin help system:
help ate

# ate Man pages:
man 1 ate     # complete usage guide
man 7 ate     # tutorials

# ate actions that provide help:

# display available ate actions:
ate <b>list_actions</b>

# display usage information about one or all ate actions:
ate <b>show_action</b> declare    # display usage for declare action
ate <b>show_action</b>            # display usage text for all actions
</pre>

## SETUP

### Clone project, build and install:

~~~sh
clone https://www.github.com/cjungmann/ate.git
cd ate
make
sudo make install
~~~
### Enable ate

As a Bash builtin, the **ate** module must be enabled before it can
be used. 

**ate** is a Bash builtin, and must be enabled for it to be used.

Part of the installation is a script, `enable_ate` that makes it
easier to aid enable **ate**.  Put the following line in a script
that will use **ate**:

~~~sh
enable $( enable_ate )
~~~

This `enable` command can be used in a shell, a script, or in the
`.bashrc` file to enable **ate** globally.

### Basic Syntax

**ate** *action_name* [*handle_name*] [**-v** *return_value_name*] [**-a** *return_array_name*] [...]

- *action_name*
  The only required argument.  Tells **ate** command
  what to do

- *handle_name* is required for table actions, but may be omitted for
  some informational actions

- **-v** *return_value_name*
  For actions returning a single value, the value is saved to
  **ATE_VALUE** unless overridden by the **-v** option.

- **-a** *return_array_name*
  For actions returning an array value (**get_row**), the array will
  be named **ATE_VALUE** unless overridden by the **-a** option.

- Extra arguments as needed by specific actions.


~~~.sh
enable -f ./ate.so ate

declare -a travel_list=(
0 "shirts"
0 "pants"
0 "shoes"
0 "toiletries"
0 "rain gear"
0 "book"
)

if ! ate declare tl_handle travel_list 2; then
   exit "$?"
fi

ate get_row_count tl_handle
echo "$ATE_VALUE"

~~~

## DOWNLOAD AND BUILD

Download or clone the code, then run `make` and `make install`:

~~~sh
make
sudo make install
~~~

Use the builtin in a script by including the following line:

~~~sh
#!/usr/bin/env bash

enable $( enable_ate )
~~~


## ALTERNATE NAMES

I'm not really happy with the name *ate*, but I'm moving on for now.
I've also considered `bat` for **Bash Array Table**, but decided
against competing with another possily popular app, [bat][bat].

Other possibilities if I want to change the name might be `bia` for
**Bash Indexed Array** or `iat` for **Indexed Array Table**.




[bat]:  "https://github.com/sharkdp/bat"

Commit message:

Added prerequisites to ensure bash builtin headers are available

README.md, after:

# PROJECT ARRAY TABLE EXTENSION

**ate** is an acronym for (Bash) Array Table Extension

## INTRODUCTION

**ate** is a loadable builtin command for Bash that enhances Bash
arrays with a table view, fast indexed access to virtual rows, and
some database features through a simple API.

Bash arrays are double-linked lists of string values with assigned
rather than positional index values.  They are optimized for efficient
appending and sequential reads (ie **for** loops), but are quite slow
for indexed access, especially for large arrays.

**ate** works with a custom Bash shell variable that catalogs the
first array element of each virtual row in a C-langauge array that
enables nearly instant indexed access to the virtual rows for
reading and writing.

## FEATURES

- **Much faster than stanard Bash array**  
  **ate** creates a C-language array index of pointers to the first
  array element of a virtual row.  The index enables direct access
  to a virtual row for both reading and writing.

- **The table state persists between calls to the `ate` command**  
  **ate** uses a custom Bash SHELL_VAR, accessed through the handle
  name, to keep track of the table dimensions and row indexes.  This
  permits Bash garbage collection to manage the memory while providing

- **Can create alternate views to a table**  
  Secondary handles can contain sorted or filtered views of a table

- **Binary search action `seek_key` for ISAM access**  
  Fast seek action enables efficient lookup tables for some
  data processing tasks

- **Can call Bash script functions to perform per-row actions**  
  The ability of **ate** to access script functions enables flexible
  programming techniques that are the reason one chooses a script
  solution.  For example, **ate** exposes C library function `qsort`
  to script-based comparison functions.

## PREREQUISITES

Building the project requires packages **build-essential** and
**bash-builtins**.  Please install them on your system if they are
not already installed.


## USAGE

**ate** features are accessed through the **ate** command, followed
by an `action` string and parameters that control the operation of
the requested action.

### Basic Operation:

<pre>
# Making a 2-field table from an array with paired values:
declare -a pets=(
  dog     bark
  cat     meow
  chicken cluck
  fish    splash
)

# Initialize the table
ate <b>declare</b> pets_handle 2 pets

# Read row #1 (index 0):
ate <b>get_row</b> pets_handle 0
echo "index 0 contains ${ATE_ARRAY[*]}"

# Update pet row's sound
ATE_ARRAY[1]="woof"
ate <b>put_row</b> pets_handle 0 ATE_ARRAY
</pre>

### Getting help:

<pre>
# Bash builtin help system:
help ate

# ate Man pages:
man 1 ate     # complete usage guide
man 7 ate     # tutorials

# ate actions that provide help:

# display available ate actions:
ate <b>list_actions</b>

# display usage information about one or all ate actions:
ate <b>show_action</b> declare    # display usage for declare action
ate <b>show_action</b>            # display usage text for all actions
</pre>

## SETUP

### Clone project, build and install:

~~~sh
clone https://www.github.com/cjungmann/ate.git
cd ate
make
sudo make install
~~~
### Enable ate

As a Bash builtin, the **ate** module must be enabled before it can
be used. 

**ate** is a Bash builtin, and must be enabled for it to be used.

Part of the installation is a script, `enable_ate` that makes it
easier to aid enable **ate**.  Put the following line in a script
that will use **ate**:

~~~sh
enable $( enable_ate )
~~~

This `enable` command can be used in a shell, a script, or in the
`.bashrc` file to enable **ate** globally.

### Basic Syntax

**ate** *action_name* [*handle_name*] [**-v** *return_value_name*] [**-a** *return_array_name*] [...]

- *action_name*
  The only required argument.  Tells **ate** command
  what to do

- *handle_name* is required for table actions, but may be omitted for
  some informational actions

- **-v** *return_value_name*
  For actions returning a single value, the value is saved to
  **ATE_VALUE** unless overridden by the **-v** option.

- **-a** *return_array_name*
  For actions returning an array value (**get_row**), the array will
  be named **ATE_VALUE** unless overridden by the **-a** option.

- Extra arguments as needed by specific actions.


~~~.sh
enable -f ./ate.so ate

declare -a travel_list=(
0 "shirts"
0 "pants"
0 "shoes"
0 "toiletries"
0 "rain gear"
0 "book"
)

if ! ate declare tl_handle travel_list 2; then
   exit "$?"
fi

ate get_row_count tl_handle
echo "$ATE_VALUE"

~~~

## DOWNLOAD AND BUILD

Download or clone the code, then run `make` and `make install`:

~~~sh
make
sudo make install
~~~

Use the builtin in a script by including the following line:

~~~sh
#!/usr/bin/env bash

enable $( enable_ate )
~~~


## ALTERNATE NAMES

I'm not really happy with the name *ate*, but I'm moving on for now.
I've also considered `bat` for **Bash Array Table**, but decided
against competing with another possily popular app, [bat][bat].

Other possibilities if I want to change the name might be `bia` for
**Bash Indexed Array** or `iat` for **Indexed Array Table**.




[bat]:  "https://github.com/sharkdp/bat"
